>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, OCTOBER, 26:
A TOP FEDERAL HEALTH OFFICIAL
SUGGESTS THE DECISION BY
GOVERNORS TO QUARANTINE DOCTORS
WHO TREATED EBOLA COULD ACTUALLY
HURT EFFORTS TO CURB THE
DISEASE.
AFTER SEVERAL RECENT INCIDENTS
IN CANADA AND IN NEW YORK, WE'LL
LOOK AT SO-CALLED LONE WOLF
TERROR ATTACKS.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT
FROM ALASKA, SCIENTISTS
GRAPPLING WITH A DEADLY DISEASE
THAT IS WIPING OUT STARFISH.
>> I'M EXPECTING THAT IN THE
NEXT TWO WEEKS WE WILL LOSE
VIRTUALLY ALL OF THE STARS AT
THIS SITE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
IN LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THE WHITE HOUSE IS REPORTEDLY
PRESSING GOVERNORS TO REVERSE
COURSE AND NOT REQUIRE DOCTORS
WHO TREAT EBOLA PATIENTS IN
AFRICA TO BE QUARANTINED.
AND TODAY, ONE OF THE NATION'S
TOP INFECTIOUS DISEASE EXPERTS,
DR. ANTHONY FAUCI, SAID THE NEW
POLICY ADOPTED IN NEW YORK, NEW
JERSEY, ILLINOIS AND FLORIDA
COULD ACTUALLY DAMAGE EFFORTS TO
CONTAIN THE DISEASE.
>> WELL, AS A SCIENTIST AND AS A
HEALTH PERSON, IF I WERE ASKED,
I WOULD NOT HAVE RECOMMENDED
THAT.
IF YOU PUT EVERYONE IN ONE
BASKET, EVEN PEOPLE WHO ARE
CLEARLY NO THREAT, THEN WE HAVE
THE PROBLEM OF THE DISINCENTIVE
OF THE PEOPLE THAT WE NEED.
LET'S NOT FORGET THE BEST WAY TO
STOP THIS EPIDEMIC AND PROTECT
AMERICA IS TO STOP IT IN AFRICA,
AND YOU CAN REALLY HELP STOPPING
IT IN AFRICA IF WE HAVE OUR
PEOPLE OUR HEROES THE HEALTH
CARE WORKERS GO THERE AND HELP
US TO PROTECT AMERICA.
WE CAN'T LOSE SIGHT OF THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS AS A
NURSE WHO TESTED NEGATIVE FOR
EBOLA WAS QUARANTINED AFTER
RETURNING FROM WEST AFRICA TO
NEWARK INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
FRIDAY.
KACI HICKOX HAS COMPLAINED THAT
SHE WAS MISTREATED WHEN SHE
ARRIVED.
SHE WROTE THIS IN THE DALLAS
MORNING NEWS:
GOVERNOR CHRIS CHRISTIE SAID
TODAY HE HAD "NO SECOND
THOUGHTS" ABOUT PLACING HER IN
QUARANTINE.
IN AFGHANISTAN TODAY, BRITISH
AND AMERICAN TROOPS OFFICIALLY
ENDED COMBAT OPERATIONS IN
HELMAND PROVINCE, WHERE FIGHTING
CONTINUES BETWEEN THE AFGHAN
ARMY AND THE TALIBAN.
THE OCCASION WAS MARKED BY THE
PLAYING OF ANTHEMS AND THE
LOWERING OF BOTH COUNTRIES'
FLAGS AT A HUGE BASE THEY HAVE
SHARED THERE.
IRAQI GOVERNMENT TROOPS
REPORTEDLY HAVE MADE SOME
HEADWAY THIS WEEKEND AGAINST
ISIS EXTREMISTS WHO HAVE
CAPTURED LARGE AREAS OF THAT
NATION.
SOLDIERS, BACKED BY SHIITE
MILITIAMEN, SAID THEY HAD
REGAINED CONTROL OF JURF-AL-
SAKHAR, A TOWN ABOUT 30 MILES
SOUTH OF THE CAPITAL.
ISIS EXTREMISTS HAD SEIZED IT IN
JULY.
THE EXTREMISTS REMAIN IN CONTROL
OF LARGE PORTIONS OF THE NORTH
AND WEST OF THE COUNTRY.
THE AMERICAN JOURNALIST, JAMES
FOLEY, REPORTEDLY WAS
WATERBOARDED AND TORTURED IN THE
MONTHS LEADING UP TO HIS
BEHEADING.
THIS ACCORDING TO A DETAILED
REPORT PUBLISHED IN TODAY'S "NEW
YORK TIMES."
ACCORDING TO THE ACCOUNT,
SEVERAL OTHER HOSTAGES WERE SET
FREE AFTER EUROPEAN GOVERNMENTS
AGREED TO MEET THE EXTREMISTS
RANSOM DEMANDS.
BRITAIN AND THE UNITED STATES
HAVE SAID THEY WILL NOT PAY
RANSOM BECAUSE, THEY SAY, IT
WOULD ONLY ENCOURAGE MORE
KIDNAPPINGS.
ANOTHER SIGN TODAY OF EUROPE'S
STILL PRECARIOUS FINANCIAL
CONDITION.
THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK SAID
13 OF EUROPE'S BIGGEST BANKS
NEED TO SHORE UP THEIR RESERVES
TO ENSURE THEIR WELL-BEING IN
THE EVENT OF ANOTHER FINANCIAL
CRISIS.
COLLECTIVELY, THOSE BANKS
REPORTEDLY NEED ANOTHER 31
BILLION DOLLARS TO GUARANTEE
THEIR SAFETY.
THE NUMBER OF PEOPLE WHO HAVE
DIED TRYING TO CROSS INTO THE
UNITED STATES FROM MEXICO HAS
HIT A 15-YEAR LOW, ACCORDING TO
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS.
THE NEWS AGENCY SAYS 307 PEOPLE
DIED DURING THE 12-MONTH PERIOD
ENDING LAST MONTH, THE LOWEST
TOTAL SINCE 1999.
AUTHORITIES CITE A NUMBER OF
FACTORS, INCLUDING INCREASED
SECURITY ALONG THE BORDER. THEY
ALSO SAY MORE PEOPLE ARE TURNING
THEMSELVES IN AT THE BORDER
RATHER THAN RISK GETTING INJURED
OR KILLED.
A NATIONWIDE RECALL OF MORE THAN
THIRTY ONE THOUSAND POUNDS OF
CHICKEN IS UNDERWAY AFTER THE
U.S.D.A. SAID THE PRODUCT MAY BE
CONTAMINATED.
THE RECALL COVERS BOXES OF
GLUTEN-FREE BREADED CHICKEN
NUGGETS AND GLUTEN FREE BREADED
CHICKEN BREASTS SOLD UNDER THE
BELL AND EVANS BRAND.
THE U.S.D.A. SAYS THE BACTERIA
CAN LEAD TO FOOD POISONING
WITHIN THIRTY MINUTES.
NO CASES OF ILLNESS HAVE BEEN
REPORTED SO FAR.
AND OFFICIALS IN HAWAII SAY LAVA
FLOWING FROM A VOLCANO IS MOVING
TOWARDS A RURAL AREA ON THE BIG
ISLAND AND THAT AN EVACUATION
MIGHT BE NECESSARY LATER THIS
WEEK.
THE LAVA HAS BEEN CREEPING
TOWARD THE TOWN OF PAHOA SINCE
JULY.
IT ONLY MOVES TEN YARDS AN HOUR,
BUT IT'S NOW CLOSE ENOUGH TO
POSE A THREAT.
THE LAVA REPORTEDLY IS MORE THAN
1,000 DEGREES.
>> Sreenivasan: DURING THE PAST
WEEK, THERE HAVE BEEN AT LEAST
THREE SEPARATE ATTACKS LAUNCHED
BY WHAT ARE REFERRED TO AS LONE
WOLF TERRORISTS WHO ARE OFTEN
INSPIRED BY PROPAGANDA FROM
GROUPS LIKE ISIS.
LAST MONDAY IN QUEBEC, A MAN,
WHO HAD CONVERTED TO ISLAM AND
HAD BECOME RADICALIZED,
PURPOSELY CRASHED HIS CAR INTO
TWO SOLDIERS, KILLING ONE OF
THEM, BEFORE HE WAS SHOT DEAD.
TWO DAYS LATER, ANOTHER GUNMAN
WITH A SIMILAR STORY KILLED A
SOLDIER STANDING GUARD AT A WAR
MEMORIAL IN OTTAWA.
HE LATER RACED INTO THE
PARLIAMENT BUILDING BEFORE BEING
SHOT DEAD.
THEN THURSDAY, IN QUEENS NEW
YORK, A MAN WHO HAD POSTED
COMMENTS SYMPATHETIC TO THE
JIHADISTS, USED A HATCHET TO
ATTACK FOUR ROOKIE POLICE
OFFICERS POSING FOR A PICTURE ON
THE STREET.
HE, TOO, WAS SHOT DEAD.
TODAY, ON THE SUNDAY TALK SHOWS,
THE HEADS OF THE HOUSE AND
SENATE INTELLIGENCE COMMITTEES,
COMMENTED ON THE ATTACKS.
>> WHAT KIND OF THREAT DOES THAT
POSE TO OUR OWN NATIONAL
SECURITY?
>> HUGE, AND GETTING WORSE.
>> THESE ATTACKS AND THE
MULTIPLICITY OF ATTACKS IN 2014
SHOW THAT THEIR PROPAGANDA IS
HAVING SOME EFFECT.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR MORE ABOUT
ALL THIS, WE ARE JOINED NOW FROM
BOSTON BY JYTTE KLAUSEN.
SHE IS A PROFESSOR AT BRANDEIS
UNIVERSITY AND THE FOUNDER OF
THE WESTERN JIHADISM PROJECT,
WHICH TRACKS THE ACTIVITY OF
ISLAMIST EXTREMISTS IN THE WEST.
BEHIND THESE LONE WOLF ATTACKS?
>> WELL, THE, THEY CALL THEM
LONE WOLVES BUT IN MOST CASES
THEY HAVE BEEN CONNECTED TO
NETWORKS AND PIER GROUPS AND
MILITANTS FOR SOME TIME AND THEY
CARRY OUT THE ATTACKS BY
THEMSELVES, BUT THEY ARE NOT ..
ACTUALLY LONE WOLVES IN THE
SENSE THAT THEY HAD JUST BECOME
RADICALIZED OFF THE INTERNET OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
OF COURSE, THERE ARE EXCEPTIONS
TO THIS GENERAL RULE, BUT RIGHT
NOW, THERE IS A CALLOUT FROM THE
ISLAMIC STATE GROUP, SOMETIMES
REFERRED TO AS ISIL, TO CARRY
OUT ATTACKS ON PEOPLE WHO
REPRESENT THE WESTERN STATES.
>> OKAY.
SO WE ARE ALSO HEARING MORE
FREQUENTLY ABOUT THE
SYMPATHIZERS IN THE WEST WHO ARE
LURED TO GO AND FIGHT FOR ISIS.
WHAT ARE THE REASONS FOR THAT?
>> WELL, THOSE THAT HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO GO, ISIS OR ISIL HAVE
INVITED THEM, THERE WERE MANY
WESTERNERS WHO TRIED TO GO AND
FIGHT FOR AL QAEDA IN IRAQ IN
THE PREVIOUS INSURGENCY IN IRAQ
AND THEY WEREN'T WELCOME, BUT
ISIL HAS BEEN PURSUING A
STRATEGY IN SYRIA FOR SOME TIME,
AND SO IN THE COURSE OF 2013
THEY STARTED ENLIGHTENING THEM
TO COME AND MANY WESTERNERS WHO
THOUGHT IT WAS A VERY ATTRACTIVE
POSITION TO WALK AROUND THE
STREETS OF THE SYRIAN CITIES
THAT THEY REFER TO AS LIBERATED
ZONE AND POLICE THE LOCAL MUSLIM
POPULATION IN THOSE PLACES, SO
THEY WERE VERY ATTRACTED TO THE
IDEA OF GETTING CONTROL AND
BEING THE BIG MAN OR BIG WOMAN
ON THE BLOCK.
>> OKAY.
ONCE THEY GET THERE, THEIR STORY
MIGHT CHANGE A BIT AS YOUR
RESEARCH TRACKS, THERE IS
ACTUALLY A MUCH HIGHER MORTALITY
RATIO OF THE WESTERNERS WHO GO
IN THERE, OFTENTIMES THEY ARE
USED AS SUICIDE BOMBERS BECAUSE
THEY ARE NOT REALLY MUCH MORE
GOOD TO ISIL OR ISIS?
>> YES.
THAT IS CORRECT.
BUT IN 2013, THE MORTALITY RATES
WEREN'T SO HIGH, THEY REALLY
HAVE PICKED UP SINCE THE START
OF THIS YEAR, AND THEY ARE NOW
PICKING UP EVIDENCE OF PEOPLE
WHO WANT TO COME HOME AND HAVE
HAD REGRETS, BUT AT THE SAME
TIME, EVEN AS THAT IS HAPPENING
THERE ARE ALSO NEW PEOPLE WHO
ARE LEAVING, SO THERE ARE -- BY
MY COUNT, BASED ON ESTIMATES
FROM THE DIFFERENT GOVERNMENTS
THERE HAVE BEEN AROUND 3,000
WESTERN WHORES HAVE AT ONE POINT
IN TIME GONE OFF AND JOINED THE
EXTREMIST JIHADIST GROUPS.
>> WHAT HAPPENS WHEN THEY COME
BACK? IS THERE EVIDENCE TO SHOW
THAT THEY ARE MORE LIKELY TO
LAUNCH AN ATTACK AT THEIR HOME
IN THE WEST?
>> THERE IS EVIDENCE OF THAT,
BUT THERE ARE ALSO SOME COMING
BACK WHO ARE EXHIBITING SIGNS OF
HAVING HAD REGRETS, PARTICULARLY
AMONGST SOME OF THE YOUNGER
GROUPS, THE WOMEN, SOME OF THE
TEENAGERS WHO HAD TAKEN OFF, BUT
THEY ARE BY NO MEANS THE ONLY
STREAM THAT HAS GONE OFF, THERE
ARE HARDENED FOLKS WHO HAVE GONE
OFF WHO HAVE EXPERIENCE FROM
PREVIOUS INSURGENCIES, A BOSTON
MAN NAMED AHMED WHO GOES TO
PAKISTAN AND TO YEMEN AND TOOK
OFF TO SYRIA IN 2006 IS NOW
BELIEVED TO BE IN CHARGE OF THE
SOCIAL MEDIA OPERATIONS ON
BEHALF OF ISIL, AND SO WE SHOULD
BE CAREFUL NOT TO DRAW FAST
CONCLUSIONS OF WHAT SORT OF
THREAT THESE PEOPLE PRESENT WHEN
THEY COME BACK, AND SO SURE,
FROM PREVIOUS EXPERIENCES
INSURGENCIES AND WESTERNERS
GOING OFF, THAT HAVING HAD THE
EXPERIENCE OF LEARNING HOW TO
CARRY OUT VIOLENCE, SHOOTING A
GUN AND PUTTING TOGETHER A BOMB,
THEY WILL COME BACK AND THEY
WILL TRY TO CARRY OUT VIOLENCE
HERE, AND THERE HAVE BEEN
INCIDENT ALREADY THAT HAVE
FORTUNATELY BEEN STOPPED WITH
THE EXCEPTION OF ONE, AN
INCIDENT IN BRUSSELS AT THE
JEWISH MUSEUM THERE.
>> ALL RIGHT.
KLAUSEN JOINING US FROM BOSTON
TODAY, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO OUR
SIGNATURE SEGMENT.
A DEADLY DISEASE HAS BEEN WIPING
OUT STARFISH ALONG THE WEST
COAST FOR MORE THAN A YEAR NOW.
IT'S CALLED SEA STAR WASTING
SYNDROME AND IT CAUSES THE
MARINE ANIMALS TO DIE IN A
PARTICULARLY GRUESOME WAY.
UNTIL RECENTLY, THE CREATURES
SEEMED TO BE FARING BETTER IN
ALASKA, BUT NO MORE.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
KATIE CAMPBELL OF KCTS-SEATTLE
TRAVELED THERE RECENTLY AND
FILED THIS STORY.
HER REPORT IS PART OF THE
ENVIRONMENTAL PUBLIC MEDIA
PROJECT EARTHFIX.
>> Reporter: IT'S EARLY MORNING
IN SITKA, ALASKA.
THE STARS HAVE YET TO FADE FROM
THE NIGHT SKY.
A GROUP OF SCIENTISTS IS
SETTING OUT IN SEARCH OF A
DIFFERENT KIND OF STAR.
SEA STARS, COMMONLY KNOWN AS
STARFISH, HAVE BEEN VANISHING
FROM ALASKA'S SHORELINE.
>> Reporter: PETER RAIMONDI IS
ONE OF THE LEAD SCIENTISTS
STUDYING AN ALARMING EPIDEMIC
THAT'S BEEN KILLING STARFISH BY
THE MILLIONS.
>> THESE CRACKS IN THE PREVIOUS
YEARS WOULD HAVE BEEN FULL
THEM.
YOU GUYS DIDN'T GET ANY LAST
TIME, DID YOU?
BACK IN JUNE?
>> Reporter: RAIMONDI AND
RESEARCHER MELISSA MINER HAVE
BEEN CONDUCTING INTENSIVE
SURVEYS OF PACIFIC COASTAL
AREAS, TRACKING THE SPREAD OF
THE DISEASE.
>> ALMOST EVERYWHERE WE'VE
LOOKED IN THE LAST YEAR WE'VE
SEEN CATASTROPHIC LOSSES OF SEA
STARS.
>> Reporter: RAIMONDI POUNDS
BOLTS IN THE ROCKS SO THAT YEAR
AFTER YEAR, THEY CAN FIND AND
SURVEY THE SAME AREAS.
ONCE THEY'VE ROPED OFF A PATCH
OF SHORELINE, THEIR TEAM COUNTS
AND MEASURES THE CREATURES THAT
LIVE HERE.
SITKA WAS ONE OF THE FIRST
PLACES THEY NOTICED SIGNS OF THE
DISEASE LAST YEAR.
NOW THE TEAM IS BACK TO CHECK ON
THE STARS.
THE QUESTION IS, WILL STARFISH
IN THE COOL WATERS OF ALASKA
SURVIVE THIS OUTBREAK?
OR WILL THEY, TOO, SUCCUMB?
>> IT'S DEFINITELY NOT SEVERELY
WASTED, BUT THOSE ARE WHAT WE'RE
CALLING EARLY WARNING SIGNS OF
WASTING.
THIS IS THE BEGINNINGS OF TWO
SEPARATE LESIONS, AND SOMETIMES
WHAT WE SEE IS THAT THIS WILL
GROW TOGETHER AND ACTUALLY, THE
WHOLE TISSUE WILL KIND OF
DEGRADE.
>> Reporter: THE SYMPTOMS VARY
DEPENDING ON THE SPECIES OF
STARFISH, BUT IT USUALLY STARTS
THE SAME WAY.
>> THEY GET WHITE LESIONS.
THEY BECOME NECROTIC, THAT MEANS
THE TISSUE DIES.
AND AS THE TISSUE DIES, THEY
OFTEN TIMES WILL LOSE ARMS AND
THEN WASTE AWAY.
THEY DISINTEGRATE.
>> SOMETIMES THEY GET LESIONS
AND THEIR INTERNAL ORGANS START
TO SPILL OUT OF THESE LESIONS.
AND THAT CAN HAPPEN WITHIN 24 TO
48 HOURS.
>> Reporter: STARFISH DEATHS
WERE FIRST REPORTED IN THE
SUMMER OF 2013 ON WASHINGTON'S
OLYMPIC PENINSULA.
REPORTS HAVE SINCE SURFACED
ALONG THOUSANDS MILES OF NORTH
AMERICA'S PACIFIC SHORES.
SEA STAR WASTING SYNDROME
AFFECTS ALMOST EVERY SPECIES OF
WEST COAST STARFISH.
THE PLAGUE HAS HIT SO HARD OVER
THE PAST YEAR THAT BIOLOGISTS
FEAR THAT SOME SPECIES COULD
EVEN GO EXTINCT.
SCIENTISTS HAVE BEEN SCRAMBLING
TO FIND ANSWERS.
DREW HARVELL IS COORDINATING
NATIONWIDE RESEARCH INTO
UNDERSTANDING THE WASTING
SYNDROME AND HAS BEEN STUDYING
MARINE DISEASES FOR DECADES.
>> THIS IS THE LARGEST DISEASE
OUTBREAK THAT WE KNOW OF EVER IN
THE OCEANS IN TERMS OF THE
NUMBERS OF SPECIES AFFECTED, IN
TERMS OF THE GEOGRAPHIC SCALE,
AND IN TERMS OF THE MORTALITY
THAT'S ASSOCIATED WITH IT.
>> Reporter: AFTER ANALYZING
COUNTLESS SAMPLES IN THE LAB,
HARVELL'S TEAM BELIEVES THAT AN
INFECTIOUS PATHOGEN-- LIKE A
BACTERIA OR VIRUS-- MAY BE THE
ROOT OF THE PROBLEM.
>> THIS IS WHAT WE CALL A WIDE
HOST RANGE PATHOGEN.
IT MEANS THAT IT AFFECTS MANY
DIFFERENT SPECIES.
AND THOSE ARE THE MOST DANGEROUS
IN WILDLIFE DISEASE IN TERMS OF
A POTENTIAL RISK OF EXTINCTION.
>> Reporter: THEY'VE LEARNED THE
SYNDROME SEEMS TO SPREAD THROUGH
WATER AND PHYSICAL CONTACT.
AND THEY'RE TESTING A HYPOTHESIS
THAT THE PATHOGEN MAY BE
TRANSFERRED THROUGH SHELLFISH,
WHICH STARFISH LIKE TO EAT.
EXACTLY WHAT TRIGGERS THESE
OUTBREAKS IS STILL UNKNOWN, BUT
SCIENTISTS THINK THE DISEASE
COULD BE COMPOUNDED BY WARMING
WATERS.
STARFISH ARE STRESSED BY HIGHER
TEMPERATURES, WHICH MAKE THEM
MORE VULNERABLE TO INFECTION.
HARVELL HAS BEEN KEEPING AN EYE
ON THE ONCE ABUNDANT STARFISH
POPULATIONS AROUND WASHINGTON'S
SAN JUAN ISLANDS.
COLD WATER HERE MAY HAVE HELPED
STARFISH WITHSTAND THE FIRST
WAVE OF THE DISEASE.
BUT SUMMERTIME BROUGHT WARMER
WATERS TO THE ISLANDS, AND
HARVELL AND HER TEAM WATCHED
STARS SUDDENLY GET SICK.
>> I'M EXPECTING THAT IN THE
NEXT TWO WEEKS WE WILL LOSE
VIRTUALLY ALL OF THE STARS AT
THIS SITE.
>> Reporter: AND THAT'S EXACTLY
WHAT HAPPENED-- ALL OF THE
STARFISH THAT WERE HERE ARE NOW
GONE.
AS OUTBREAKS CONTINUE IN PUGET
SOUND, SCIENTISTS ARE LOOKING
NORTH FOR A SIGN OF HOPE.
>> THE HOPE IS THAT THE WATERS
ARE COLD ENOUGH IN ALASKA, THE
NORTHERN PART OF THEIR RANGE FOR
MANY OF THESE SPECIES, THAT
THEY'LL PERSIST THERE.
>> Reporter: THIS SUMMER,
MELISSA MINER WAS HOPEFUL THAT
WOULD BE THE CASE.
>> THIS IS ONE OF THE FEW PLACES
THAT COULD POTENTIALLY BE A
SOURCE OF REPLENISHMENT FOR SOME
OF THESE AREAS THAT HAVE BEEN
HIT REALLY HARD.
>> Reporter: BACK IN SITKA,
TROUBLE IS ON THE HORIZON.
IN RECENT MONTHS WATER
TEMPERATURES HERE HAVE BEEN
HIGHER THAN NORMAL, AND THIS
FALL A BAND OF WARM PACIFIC
WATER IS EXPECTED TO TRAVEL
FARTHER NORTH HEATING UP THE
WATERS HERE EVEN MORE.
TO PREPARE, RAIMONDI IS IN
INSTALLING SENSORS WILL MEASURE
THE WATER TEMPERATURE.
>> SO WE'LL GET REALLY GOOD
RECORDS OVER THE NEXT YEAR OF
TEMPERATURE.
THEN WE CAN SEE WHETHER THAT
RELATES TO ANY CHANGE IN THE
DISEASE THAT WE SEE AT THIS
PARTICULAR SITE.
>> Reporter: THAT WAY IF A MASS
DIE-OFF OCCURS, THEY'LL KNOW THE
EXACT OCEAN CONDITIONS.
THERE'S NOTHING THE RESEARCHERS
CAN DO TO PREVENT AN OUTBREAK.
BUT THEY CAN COUNT AND MEASURE
WHAT'S HERE NOW.
THEIR DATA WILL PROVIDE A
CRITICAL POINT OF COMPARISON FOR
WHAT NORMAL STARFISH POPULATIONS
SHOULD BE.
>> IF YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
THERE, YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT'S
LOST.
>> Reporter: THE RESULTS OF THE
ALASKA INTERTIDAL SURVEYS ARE
MIXED.
>> THIS IS PROBABLY THE WORST
ONE THAT WE'VE SEEN HERE TODAY.
YOU CAN SEE HERE THE WHOLE AREA
THAT'S DISEASED.
BUT THE GOOD THING IS THAT
THERE'S NOT A REALLY HIGH
PERCENTAGE OF DISEASED ANIMALS.
>> Reporter: WITHOUT KNOWING THE
CAUSE OF THESE OUTBREAKS, IT'S
IMPOSSIBLE TO TELL WHETHER THE
EPIDEMIC IS NEARLY FINISHED OR
WHETHER ANOTHER MASS DIE-OFF IS
JUST GETTING STARTED.
>> IF WE KNEW WHAT WAS CAUSING
IT, WE WOULD HAVE A MUCH BETTER
UNDERSTANDING OF WHERE WE ARE,
BUT NOT KNOWING WHERE WE ARE IN
THE CHRONOLOGY OF THIS EVENT IS
REALLY FRUSTRATING AND KINDA
SCARY.
>> Reporter: AFTER LEAVING
SITKA, RAIMONDI AND MINER BEGAN
RECEIVING DISTURBING REPORTS.
THE HEALTHY-LOOKING STARS THEY
CAREFULLY COUNTED JUST DAYS
BEFORE WERE SUDDENLY LOSING ARMS
AND WASTING AWAY.
TIME WILL TELL WHETHER ALASKA
WILL BE A STARFISH GRAVEYARD OR
A REFUGE.
>> Sreenivasan: LEARN MORE ABOUT
WHY SCIENTISTS THINK ALASKA MAY
HOLD THE KEY TO REPLENISHING
STARFISH ON THE BRINK OF
EXTINCTION.
VISIT newshour.pbs.org.
>> Sreenivasan: FOR TEN DAYS
NOW, WE'VE BEEN HEARING REPORTS
FROM AFRICA THAT THOSE HUNDREDS
OF SCHOOLGIRLS WHO WERE
ABDUCTED BY BOKO HARAM
EXTREMISTS LAST SPRING WERE
ABOUT TO BE RELEASED.
BUT SO FAR, AT LEAST, IT HASN'T
HAPPENED.
AND, ACCORDING TO REPORTS,
ANOTHER 30 ADOLESCENTS WERE
ABDUCTED IN NIGERIA TODAY.
FOR THE LATEST, WE ARE JOINED
NOW VIA SKYPE FROM LAGOS,
NIGERIA, BY TIM COCKS OF
REUTERS.
ABOUT THE DEAL, WHERE DOES IT
STAND?
>> WELL, THEY ARE STILL IN TALKS
IN CHAD.
IT WAS TO BE EXPECTED I THINK
EVERYONE FELT THE GOVERNMENT WAS
BEING WILDLY OVER OPTIMISTIC IN
SAYING WE WOULD HAVE THE GIRLS
OUT BY LAST MONDAY.
THE -- IT IS EXTREMELY
COMPLICATED SYSTEMS THE WAY
BOKO HARAM WORKS.
THEY HAVE MULTIPLE FACTIONS, IT
IS DIFFICULT TO GET THEM ALL TO
DO WHAT ONE PARTICULAR FACTION
WANTS THEM TO DO.
THE GOVERNMENTS SAY THEY
ARE NEGOTIATING WITH BONA FIDE
BOKO HARAM MILITANTS AND THAT
THEY SHOW WILLINGNESS TO RELEASE
THE GIRLS BUT IT IS STILL NOT
CLEAR WHETHER THAT FACTION HAS
ALL OF THE GIRLS OR HAVE SOME OF
THE GIRLS OR WHETHER IT HAS
ACCESS TO ANOTHER FACTION THAT
IS HOLDING THEM.
THERE IS SO MUCH MYSTERY
SURROUNDING THIS WHOLE THING
THAT IT IS ACTUALLY VERY
DIFFICULT TO SAY WHETHER OR NOT
THE GIRLS WILL BE OUT IN A WEEK
OR WHETHER THIS WHOLE THING
COULD JUST FALL APART.
>> SO WHILE THEY TALK ABOUT
NEGOTIATING THE RELEASE OF THESE
200 THAT THE WORLD PAID
ATTENTION TO, THERE HAVE BEEN
SUBSEQUENT KIDNAPPINGS?
>> THERE HAVE BEEN, YES.
THE GOVERNMENT SAYS THAT THE
KIDNAPPINGS OF THE, ARE THE
WORKS OF CRIMINAL GROUPS WHICH
MAY BE TRUE BECAUSE OF COURSE IN
THIS AREA, WHICH HAS NOW BECOME
SO FLAW LESS, THE AREA BETWEEN
CHAD, CAMEROON AND NIGERIA, UP
IN THE NORTHEAST NIGERIA ARE SO
LAWLESS THERE IS A LOT OF
ASSOCIATED CRIMINALITY WHICH THE
BOKO HARAM MILITANTS USE TO FUND
THEIR OPERATION.
IT PROBABLY WASN'T THAT
SURPRISING THAT THE GOVERNMENT
ANNOUNCE ADD CEASE-FIRE THAT
SOME GROUP OR ANOTHER WOULD GO
ON THE RAMPAGE AND SAY NO WE ARE
NOT AGREEING TO THIS.
BUT WHAT MATTERS TO THESE FOLKS
IS WHETHER THOSE GIRLS ARE BEING
HELD BY THE FACTION THAT ARE IN
CHAD, IN TALKS WITH THE
GOVERNMENT AND THE GOVERNMENT
SAYS WE WOULDN'T BE HERE IF WE
WEREN'T PRETTY CONFIDENT THAT IS
THE CASE.
>> AT THESE NEGOTIATIONS WHO
REPRESENTS WHO HERE?
I MEAN, IS GOVERNMENT ACTUALLY
SIT ACROSS THE TABLE FROM
BOKO HARAM?
>> WELL, THERE IS A GUY WHO
CLAIMS THAT HE IS THE GENERAL OF
BOKO HARAM, THIS IS, QUITE A FEW
ALARM BELLS, HIS NAME HAS NEVER
BEEN HEARD OF BEFORE.
WHAT REALLY MATTERS TO THESE
TALKS IS WHETHER THIS MAN CAN
ACTUALLY GET THOSE GIRLS FREED,
AND THE FEELING IS THAT IT IS
STILL VERY MUCH A LONG SHOT.
>> AND WHO REPRESENTS THE
GOVERNMENT IN THIS CONVERSATION?
>> IT IS ALL VERY HUSH, HUSH
ACTUALLY.
THE GOVERNMENT DOESN'T WANT TO
GIVE A WHOLE LOT AWAY, WHICH IS
WHY IT WAS ACTUALLY CONSIDERED
TO BE A LITTLE BIT OF A
MISTAKE IN ANNOUNCING THE
CEASE-FIRE BECAUSE BEFORE THEY
DID THAT, IT HAD BEEN QUIET FOR
A COUPLE OF WEEKS AND SUDDENLY
THE VIOLENCE STARTS UP AGAIN SO
I THINK THE THING IS VERY MUCH
SHROUDED IN MYSTERY, WE HAVE AT
THE MOMENT TRYING TO COVER
THEM, BUT THEY ARE VERY MUCH
LIMITING ACCESS TO JOURNALISTS,
THE INFORMATION, UNTIL THEY
HAVE SOMETHING SOLID THEY CAN
PRESENT AND SAY, YES, WE HAVE
MADE -- WE HAVE HAD SUCCESS.
>> ALL RIGHT, TIM COCKS OF
REUTERS JOINING US LIVE IN
NIGERIA, THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
VIEWERS LIKE YOU-- YOUR
FEEDBACK ABOUT SOME OF OUR
RECENT WORK.
WE HEARD FROM MANY OF YOU ABOUT
OUR REPORT LAST NIGHT EXAMINING
WHETHER SOCCER IS SAFE, GIVEN
THE THOUSANDS OF CONCUSSIONS
THAT OCCUR EVERY YEAR AFTER KIDS
USE THEIR HEADS TO MAKE CONTACT
WITH THE BALL.
GENEVIEVE SALEM WROTE US:
"THIS IS RIDICULOUS.
THE RISKS OF PLAYING SOCCER PALE
IN COMPARISON WITH SPORTS LIKE
FOOTBALL OR ICE HOCKEY."
DOROTHY CRUSE WROTE:
"ALL SPORTS HAVE ELEMENTS OF
DANGER."
GUIDO BORGOGOLI ASKED:
"DO YOU THINK THEY'RE WORRIED
ABOUT THIS IN ARGENTINA AND
GERMANY?"
AND ROBERT EADES HAD THIS TO
SAY: "FEAR IS NO EXCUSE NOT TO
LET YOUR CHILD ENJOY SPORTS, AS
RISK IS A PART OF LIFE.
NOT LIVING IS WORSE ON YOUR
SOUL."
KELLY "JOSLIN" WALL TALKED ABOUT
HER FAMILY'S EXPERIENCES:
"MY SON HAS PLAYED SOCCER SINCE
KINDERGARTEN, AND IS NOW A
SOPHOMORE.
HIS FIRST CONCUSSION WAS FOUR
YEARS AGO, FALLING OFF A BIKE
WITH A HELMET ON.
THE SECOND CONCUSSION WAS THIS
YEAR IN SOCCER.
WENT THROUGH THE PROTOCOLS AND
WAS CLEARED WITHIN TWO WEEKS.
THINGS HAPPEN IN SPORTS AND IN
EVERYDAY LIFE."
BUT CASSIDY KING DISAGREED,
WRITING: "PEOPLE WHO ARE SAYING,
'GET OVER IT, ' REALLY DON'T
UNDERSTAND THE REPERCUSSIONS OF
CONCUSSIONS."
CANNW ADDED THIS: "THERE ARE SO
MANY OTHER WAYS TO LEARN THE
VALUE OF HARD WORK AND TEAMWORK.
ANOTHER THOUGHT, HOW MUCH OF
PLAYING SPORTS IS ACTUALLY
DRIVEN BY THE PARENT RATHER THAN
THE CHILD?"
STINGER SUGGESTED THIS: "FOR
STARTERS, BAN HEADING THE
BALL WHEN THE GOALIE PUNTS IT.
THE BALL IS TRAVELING FAST, AND
IT'S A USELESS HEADER ANYWAY,
RARELY DOES SOMEONE ACTUALLY
HEAD IT TO A TEAMMATE
INTENTIONALLY.
EVENTUALLY I THINK ALL HEADING
WILL HAVE TO BE BANNED."
FINALLY, CANDID ONE SAID THIS:
"AS THIS SEGMENT SO FAIRLY
DEPICTS, THERE WON'T BE AN EASY
ANSWER TO THESE KINDS OF
QUANDARIES AS WE ENCOUNTER THEM
DURING PARENTHOOD."
WE WELCOME YOUR FEEDBACK ON OUR
STORIES, TELL US WHAT YOU THINK
ON FACEBOOK, TWITTER OR ON OUR
WEBSITE AT newshour.pbs.org.
SOME MORE NEWS BEFORE WE
LEAVE YOU TONIGHT, PRO WESTERN
PARTIES HAVE COME OUT ON TOP IN
PARLIAMENTARY ELECTIONS IN
UKRAINE, A PRO-RUSSIAN PARTY GOT
SEVEN PERCENT OF THE VOTE.
AT LEAST TWO ROCKETS WERE FIRED
INTO THE HEAVILY PROTECTED GREEN
ZONE IN KABUL, AFGHANISTAN, THEY
LANDED NEAR THE U.S. EMBASSY
BUT NO ONE WAS HURT AND
CONSUMING LARGE AMOUNTS OF
SUBSTANCE FOUND IN COCOA PLANTS
IMPROVED MEMORY IN PEOPLE IN
50s AND 60s ACCORDING TO
A NEW COLUMBIA STUDY.
THAT'S IT, I AM HARI
SREENIVASAN, THANKS FOR
WATCHING.